ah life without escalators boy that'd be
a drag
only a pro athlete could climb all those
steps without losing their breath
but hey how does an escalator work and
why are those steps so steep anyway
well hop on board we'll get there in
time our story begins in the 1890s
the early days of coca-cola hershey's
chocolate
and motion pictures a strange
contraption is being built at new york's
coney island park
the thing travels along a 25 degree
incline
and only goes up seven feet yet
spectators back then were amazed
and slightly nauseated by the futuristic
moving stairs
it was the world's first escalator and
it was just
a temporary amusement park attraction
fast forward to the modern escalator
let's open it up and see how it all
works an escalator is simply two chains
going in circles
two pairs of huge gears connected to an
electric motor
drive this endless loop the chains guide
rails and motor are inside a sturdy
metal frame called a truss
that extends between floors each
escalator also features a handrail
driven by the same motor
why it often goes faster than the steps
well we'll get there
each step of the escalator has two
wheels on both sides
the upper pair is pulled by a chain and
rolls along the guide rails
the second pair is there so the steps
remain level all the time
once a step goes to the top or bottom of
the escalator
it flips over and continues its way
upside down
but you don't see it that's all
happening right under your feet
so technically while riding on the
escalator we stand
both on the outside and the inside at
the same time
maybe in a parallel universe another you
is traveling just beneath you
how did the escalator get its name well
more than a century ago
the company otis registered the
escalator trademark
it combines the latin word scala meaning
stairway
and elevator the word escalator was used
to designate the brand
but it became so famous that it started
to mean the mechanism itself
kind of like how we call all adhesive
bandages band-aids
an escalator is just a variation of the
conveyor belt
you see on a treadmill or at the grocery
store
yeah the escalator takes people up or
down and the belt at the checkout moves
products toward the cashier
but they work on the same principle ski
resorts also use this system to take
skiers up to the top of the slope
escalators differ in length and width
and can work alongside each other
or in a crisscross pattern there are
also spiral escalators that save
space engineer jack levy went even
further in 2010
he came up with a wavy shaped escalator
that can turn corners
his so-called levitator remains
unrealized though
escalators rarely change their speed if
they did
it'd be hard for passengers to keep
their balance but they usually go
about one to two miles per hour
depending on the machine's purpose
subway escalators are typically faster
than the ones at the mall
the reason well when you're in the
subway your only interest is getting
from a to b
as fast as possible in the malls most
people want
time to look around and relax escalators
can be a huge waste of energy when
nobody uses them
that's why on-demand types appeared they
have motion
sensors and run when someone steps on
them some of these eco-friendly machines
even weigh passengers
and lower the speed when the belt isn't
so busy
all escalators have an emergency stop
button on the upper and lower platforms
if you push it don't expect a domino
effect or anything
the escalator will come to a stop slowly
giving passengers enough time to grab
the handrails for balance
escalator steps have a higher rise than
an ordinary staircase
because they're not meant to be walked
on that's why it's so exhausting to go
up the escalator when it's not working
the second reason it takes so much
effort to go up is psychological
you expect the steps to move and it's
hard for your brain to realize they're
not
now escalators might not be meant to
walk on
but there is an unspoken rule if you
decide to
stand on the right walk on the left same
thing on the roads
slow drivers stick to the right lane and
the fast lane is on the left
but this common practice isn't the most
efficient way to use escalators
studies show that more people can get to
where they're going much faster
if everyone stands but even knowing that
it isn't easy to train people to stand
on both sides
because we're so used to the stand here
walk here rule
as you're standing there you probably
notice that the escalator handrail
often moves faster than the steps this
happens when the rollers turning the
handrail are new
they're made two percent larger to
prevent wearing them down too fast
if a handrail moves at the same speed as
the steps it means the escalator is
already halfway through its service life
and if your hand slowly starts falling
behind the rest of you
well the one you're riding on is pretty
old
and those brushes on the side aren't
there to clean your shoes
they're supposed to encourage passengers
to move away from the edges of the steps
if the bristles touch your leg it lets
you know you're standing too close to
the gap
between the stairs and the wall keeping
a safe distance means your shoe laces
or loose hanging clothes won't get
pulled into it
now beside the bristles the bright
yellow lines mark the edges of these
steps too
so when you're riding on an escalator
stay within these bright borders
they also visually divide one step from
another
so if you're walking up or down them you
won't miss a step and go
tumbling there's also a reason for those
grooves in the steps
say you dropped your pen on the
escalator without noticing it
when the pen reaches the top or bottom
of the stairs
it won't get stuck these grooves go
through the teeth of the comb plate that
pushes the objects out
grooves won't let your feet get trapped
between the steps and the platform
either
oh that's a good thing a moving sidewalk
is a cool
futuristic variation of an escalator but
it's just as old
the first ever built is also the longest
it was made for the 1893 world's fair in
chicago
the walkway was divided into two
sections so passengers could both sit
and stand while riding on it it was more
than half a mile long
and still holds the guinness record
imagine
riding on an escalator through water
full of sharks
you can do just that in taiwan's holly
and far glory ocean park
this amazing escalator goes up and down
through an aquarium
so visitors have enough time to admire
all kinds of colorful
and intimidating sea creatures the
longest single span
escalators are in saint petersburg and
moscow
each of them reaches up to 426 feet in
length
about the height of the great pyramid of
giza the longest system
is the central mid-levels escalator in
hong kong
it includes 18 escalators and three
moving walkways
that all cover 2 600 feet it takes about
20 minutes to make the whole route
so people often walk on the moving
escalator to save time
the giant escalator in medellin colombia
is designed to save the resident's time
it reduces the journey through the hilly
area from 35
to 6 minutes without it people would
have to climb the equivalent of
28 floors the highest functioning
escalator in the world is in osaka japan
it connects the two parts of the huge
umeda sky building
the escalator is inside an enormous
glass tunnel
550 feet off the ground as high as the
washington monument
imagine what kind of view passengers get
while moving from one building to
another
while we're in japan let's ride the
world's shortest escalator
it's in a mall in kawasaki this record
holding machine is less than three feet
high
and has just five steps the oldest
operating escalator
is in the macy's herald square shopping
mall in new york
it was built about a hundred years ago
the mechanical parts of this historic
escalator have been updated
but its wooden walls and steps have
remained intact this whole time
finally there are also bike escalators
they have one in trondheim norway
to take cyclists up a steep hill you
just place one foot on the platform
and the escalator pushes you to the top
at a comfortable speed
yes even escalators have their ups and
downs